Team high volume or team low volume,
which side are you on? I'm going to tell
you right now that I'm on neither side
because there is no such thing as a
side. And if you think that there is,
then you're missing out on a lot. There
are a lot of benefits that you can make
from using high volume programming. And
there's a lot of benefits that you can
make from using low volume. So when we
say low volume, you can also assume that
it's a higher intensity. And when we say
high volume, you can also assume that
it's a lower intensity.
Now, this is where it gets tricky. What
does intensity mean? For some people it
means how hard you work, but in the
context of what we're discussing today,
it means percentage of max. So high
intensity means pretty heavy. It's
usually intense workouts are things like
over 80% of your max. So that's strength
training. And low intensity, you can
train really, really hard, but a low
intensity relative to your max means,
you know, under 80% higher volume.
That's low intensity, you can still
train really, really hard. A lot of the
people are of the belief that we need to
kind of choose a rep range, a single rep
range or uh you know these days people
are saying that high volume work, high
rep ranges are more fatiguing. So that's
a lot of research that points towards
that and so why would we bother? There's
a lot of research that talks about how
wasteful it is to do high rep sets
because it's really only the last, you
know, people say the number five. Of
course it's not that simple, but let's
just say it is. It's the last five reps
of any of our sets where the weights
start getting really hard. So, if you're
doing a set of 15, the first 10
repetitions moving very fast and very
easily are not really contributing to
much muscle growth. But it's only when
it starts getting harder that the bar
speed slows down. This is when we start
increasing the mechanical tension.
Mechanical tension is the mechanism of
hypertrophy. And that's where people
say, if you're doing a set of 15, it's
only the last five reps that really
count. So, what did the first 10 reps
do? All it did was contributed to
fatigue and not much else. Now, it's not
that simple. The fact is, you know,
well, the merit behind all that says,
you know, don't do sets of 15. Instead,
just do sets of five where it's every
single repetition is beneficial and
you're not wasting time or fatigue or
energy um on repetitions that don't
contribute to muscle hypertrophy. It's
not that simple. If all I did was five
reps and less because that's the only
effective repetitions,
I'll tell you right now, it hurts. I'm
quite strong. And for me, I'm at a point
where I could probably do five reps of
about 180 kg. Maybe not today, but you
know, last couple of weeks ago, I did
that. And that's hard. If I did that
every single time I came into the gym, I
would probably end up with injuries.
And, you know, my body hurts after doing
multiple sessions of that and multiple
phases of that. So, I'm going to
introduce you to a method where we get
the best of both worlds because that's
how most people should train. There is a
lot of merit and value behind high rep
work. And there's a lot of physical
qualities that we can attain with our
high volume phases such as work capacity
as well as muscle hypertrophy. And I
know that there's people out there that
say you can achieve optimal hypertrophy
with low reps. Yeah, you can achieve
great hypertrophy, but let's not talk so
much about the science. Science matters,
but let's talk about practical
application in the real world. Why don't
we go and have a look at the best of the
best bodybuilders in the world and see
what they're doing? I promise you,
they're not doing sets of, you know,
five and under for the bulk of their
training. They are doing higher rep
work. And usually it's kind of anywhere
between eight reps and upwards, kind of
like 8 to 20 rep range is probably most
commonly performed with the largest
humans. I'm talking about, you know, the
biggest muscles on the planet. The
largest humans in our, you know,
weightlifting community are strong men,
but objectively bodybuilders have bigger
muscles proportionately. And they are
usually using 8 to 20 rep ranges
depending on the different exercise. And
you know, then we've got all these
people these days, the modern day
scientists that are saying eight reps
and less is what we should be doing
because that's the most optimal way of
building muscle. Well, I disagree. And I
always like to look at the best lifters
and the best athletes and the best
bodybuilders and strength athletes in
the world and see what they're doing in
addition to the research. So now I'm
going to continue my bench press
session. Um, you know, I'll probably
work towards four plates aside, which is
180 kg. And I'm going to be talking to
you about a really, really nice
programming strategy that I learned from
my mentor Charles Polloquin. It's called
monthly undulating periodization. And
I'm going to talk to you about how to
set up your program so that you can
benefit from monthly undulating
periodization as well.
Thanks.
two reps. Um, easy but also heavy. Today
I did my heavy squats the other day. So,
normally the way that I would structure
my training is I usually go heavy squats
and then the next upper body session cuz
it's upper, lower, upper, lower. That's
my split. The next upper session is my
light day, but this week has been all
over the place. So, this is my heavy
day. So, I'm still paying for it. Bit of
discomfort in my shoulders. So, um, I
wanted to leave repetitions in reserve
and that definitely felt heavier than
what it normally would have. Uh, but
either way, this is my that's my top
heavy set. I'm going to do a little bit
of back down work. This is a completely
different strategy that I'm doing. I'm
using top set back down work. This is
one of my favorite ways of
strength training. And when it comes to
strength training that I'm doing, um,
whenever I do a top set like that, it's
too demanding on my body to do multiple
sets of all the time. So, the top set,
back down set, allows me to feel a heavy
weight, which is nice, but then
accumulate some volume with the back
down work. Now, that's a completely
different strategy that I'm about to
teach you guys. We've got a full video
of top set back down set method, which
I'll put the link up here. Um, and you
should check that out. It's a really
nice strategy, great way of peaking and
teaching you how to handle heavy
weights. Uh, but
what I'm going to be teaching you guys
is a long-term periodization strategy
where we can get the most out of using
high volume as well as using low volume.
Feels
good.
I like the six rep range for strength.
I'd say that's the sweet spot. So, I'll
do two sets of that. I think six reps is
the sweet spot for for strength, but
also nice carryover for muscle building
because you need muscle to get stronger.
the larger the muscle you build, so the
greater the cross-sectional area, the
greater the strength potential. A lot of
people say things like, you know, big
muscles doesn't mean big strength. I
disagree. I think it's u strength is a
skill and it's more about strength
potential. And a lot of people took it
talk about bodybuilders being weak and I
disagree. I don't think that they're
weak. I think the bodybuilders are
strong. They just don't practice the
specific skills that a powerlifter or a
strongman practice. But every time I've
worked with a bodybuilder that has very
big muscles and they do an exercise like
a bench press, I watch them, you know,
if you give them a strength phase and
give them specific skill work, they're
very good, very strong with high rep
work. But then if you gradually
introduce them the skill of strength and
low rep work, they build a lot quicker
than people with smaller muscles. But
either way, as a strength athlete, the
best strength athletes in the world
factor in bouts of hypertrophy, so
higher rep work to specifically work on
building muscle. Now, here's the
strategy and this is why I love it. A
very common style of periodization is
called traditional periodization, which
is another words other people like to
call it linear periodization. The
problem is nothing's linear. We factor
in D loads. We don't improve linearly.
And so, a lot of people get upset with
the terminology. So, traditional
periodization is the more correct way of
saying it where it's the same concept
where over a long period of time, we
start with higher volume and lower loads
and we gradually decrease those rep
ranges. decrease the volume over the
long term so that we can gradually
increase the load. So that's a very
traditional way of periodizing and it's
very very effective. The negatives of
that is when you're spending a long time
in this high volume work, you're
draining any of the neural adaptations
that you made in the in the previous
phase if you just came off a really
heavy strength block and a long-term
plan if you've built a lot of great
strength. And then when you go into a
long time period of high rep work, you
start to d-train the neural adaptations
that you made. And then what happens is
you gradually gradually you know you
spend so much time away from other
physical qualities and then at the end
of the long-term plan you're doing a lot
of low volume and heavy load work you
are gradually draining all of the
amazing work you did with the high
volume phase. So this is the beauty of
monthly undulating programming is you're
not spending enough time away from any
of those physical qualities to be losing
those. So, the way that it works is
you'd start most long-term plans, we'd
start with high volume. And instead of
going high volume to gradually less
volume and gradually less volume, we go
from high volume such as like 10 to
12elves. I'll write you guys out, not a
complete program that takes too long and
there's so many ways of doing that. I'll
write you a just a base level of
structuring your program. So, when you
think of the main work, that's what I
want you to think of. In the first
phase, let's consider high rep work.
Let's just say 10. So, we do a phase of
high volume work. This is called the
accumulation phase. Now, the objective
here is to build muscle. And muscle
building is specific. If you're a
powerlifter, it's not just about a
bodybuilding program. You don't have to
train like a bodybuilder with exercises
that a bodybuilder would use. So, like a
lot of machine work, a lot of cable
work, a lot of flies, a lot of pec deck
is very beneficial for a bodybuilder,
but not as beneficial for a powerlifter
who needs specific hypertrophy to meet
the demands of their sport. So
therefore, a hypertrophy phase for a
bodybuilder would be flies, machines,
all those things or whatever. There's no
specific exercise they must do. But a
hypertrophy phase for a strength athlete
would include lots of great press work.
So I would consider something like doing
a bench press, but not the competition
style. I would do a bench press with a
maybe a closer grip with less of an
arch. So I'm still strengthening the
muscles in coordination with each other,
but in a way that it develops more
muscle building, develops more pecs. So,
the way that I've I've even discussed
this before, the ways that I would bench
press if I was a bodybuilder compared to
the way I bench press as a powerlifter.
As a powerlifter, it's wide grip with an
arch to minimize my range of motion and
maximize my levers. But as a
bodybuilder, I would consider bringing
my grip in just a little bit. So, it's a
mid-grip, not arching as much, so it's a
flat foot. And maybe flaring the elbows
a little bit more to increase the
tension on the pec muscle. So, it's a
slightly different technique. And that's
something that I would suggest for a
bodybuilding phase. Sorry, I shouldn't
call it that. A hypertrophy phase for a
powerlifter. So, we do 10 reps to start.
Now, this is called the accumulation
phase. That's where we're increasing the
reps. And the main focus here is
building work capacity, but also
building muscle. From here, how long are
your phases? You know that I like to do
four week phases. Some people like
longer than that, and that's totally
fine as long as you can justify it. But,
let's just say we're doing four weekly
phases, which is what I like. four weeks
of 10. Then the next phase we go
straight from the high volume instead of
gradually decreasing we do more of a
rapid decrease to an intensification
phase which is lower reps so that we can
increase the loads. So we go straight
from a muscle building phase to to
straight into a strength building phase.
So we go accumulation intensification.
So what does the strength building phase
look like? Optimal rep ranges for
building strength. So what we need to
consider is this has to carry over to a
powerlifter. So, a powerlifter needs to
factor in skill work, the skill of doing
a squat, bench press, and a deadlift.
So, we need to still consider gradually
over the course of a long-term plan
peaking that lifter to do a one rep max,
but not yet. So, something that I would
suggest is you go from 10 rep range to
like four rep range. So, this time I'm
doing like a a bodybuilder style or a
hypertrophy style bench press, which I
suggested was flat foot with uh minimal
arch and a mid-grip. So, we do that for
the bench press. For the for the squat,
I'd do like a high bar squat for the 10
rep range. For the deadlift, maybe I'd
do like a snatch grip deadlift or even a
Romanian deadlift or a stifflegged
deadlift for sets of 10. Something that
focuses more on building specific
muscles rather than just shifting the
heaviest loads. So, you could really
alternate just between those two
variations. So, we go bodybuilder style
bench press, which is mid-grip, flat
foot, and then in the strength phase,
which is fours, we go to the
powerlifting technique, which is what I
just did. So, we do fours. That's the
intensification phase where we're also
building skill. Then, you know, same
with the squats. We started with a high
bar and then we go low bar. So, we go
muscle building specific to powerlifting
specific. So, we go squat phase would go
high bar, high reps, low bar with lower
reps. And then on the next phase, we go
back again. So, we go accumulation,
intensification, accumulation,
intensification. So, this is four
blocks. I like to do four weeks. So,
that's a 16e program for you where we go
10 to fours, right? So from the squat
phases, we go from high bar to low bar.
The bench press phase, we go from um mid
grip, which is a hypertrophy building to
wide grip with a lever. For a deadlift,
let's just call it Romanian deadlift.
From a Romanian deadlift in the muscle
building phase, to a conventional
deadlift or whatever the specific lift,
so let's not assume a let's assume that
most of you don't do sumo deadlifts, but
if you do, that's up to you. But let's
just say conventional deadlifts. So we
go Romanian deadlifts to conventional
deadlifts, right? So, those are the two
different variations that we're using
throughout the entire long-term plan.
And we just alternate between those two.
So, we do high reps on the muscle
building variation, then low reps on the
powerlifting specific variation. So, now
let's go back to the reps. Phase one,
sets of 10 on those exercises. So, squat
is high bar, bench press is mid-grip,
deadlift is Romanian. The next phase,
sets of four. So four weeks later, we do
sets of four. Squats, low bar sets of
four, bench press, arch back,
powerlifting style, bench press, sets of
four, and conventional deadlift for sets
of four. From here, we've just built,
we've turned that muscle that we've
built from the high volume to strong
muscle now in the low volume. Now, we go
back to high volume again. So, we don't
spend enough time away from any of these
phases to drain those like we would in a
traditional or a linear style of
periodization, right? So we go tens to
fours and then the next phase of
accumulation we still want to progress
from the first phase. First phase which
was 10. So the next phase of
accumulation we're doing eight rep
range. All right. And you can keep it
simple and go back to those same
exercises again. So high bar squats,
flat foot mid-grip bench press and
Romanian deadlifts, but this time we're
doing for eights. So what we want to do
is progress on those sets of eights from
the first round of sets of 10. So,
because we've reduced the reps and we've
built strength, we're going to be able
to perform that hypertrophy block with a
lot heavier weights now because we're
getting stronger, we're building muscle,
and we've also reduced the reps. Okay?
Hope you're following. We'll write it
down. Then the next phase is our next
intensification phase again, right? So,
we've gone four week blocks. So, we've
done 12 weeks already, four weeks of
accumulation of 10. Then four weeks of
intensification, four reps. Then four
weeks back to accumulation, eight reps.
And then the final phase of strength
before we peak is four weeks of
intensification again. And now we want
to progress from the last phase of
intensification. The last phase of
intensification was fours. What's the
next logical phase? If we reduce two
reps from accumulation to accumulation,
we're going to do the same thing. Reduce
two reps from intensification to
intensification. So the first phase of
intensification was four reps. The next
phase is two rep range. So this is our
weeks 13, 14, 15, 16 on heavy doubles
for the powerlifting specific exercises
which are low bar squat again,
powerlifting style bench press again and
conventional deadlift again for doubles.
So that's a 16week block, tens, fours,
eights, twos. Then if you comp you do a
peaking block, a four-we peaking block.
Have I done a video on peaking?
>> Yes, we actually gave a program.
>> We gave a peing program. Why don't we
insert the link here where you can do
the specific just the last phase of
peaking? How good is that? What a
strategy. What do you reckon, Musty? Do
you reckon that's a good strategy?
>> Too much,
>> dude. You know how much I charge for
those programs? Well, I'll tell you how
much I charge. It's usually about $600
Australian dollars per four-week phase.
And I'm just giving it away to you.
Damn.
>> Someone asked about what program would
you recommend? the programs that I would
recommend to people if they want to buy
it is to be honest with you, there's a
lot that goes into my programming that's
not just writing out a program and
sending it to you. So, I said $600
Australian, but that also includes you
sending me videos of your lifts and me
coaching you through it and giving you
feedback along the way. So, that's one
unfortunate thing that I'm not giving
you with these videos, except you can
just watch how I do the techniques and
you learn a ton that way. But, if you
want to employ me and be a coach, that's
also fine. But, that's the cost and
that's what I'll give you. But these
programs, they're a tier A tier
programs. Hang on a second. What's the
lingo of you guys? It's S tier, isn't
it? Yeah, these are S tier programs, let
me tell you. Uh anyway, uh I'm going to
do a set of accessories. You know, of
course, I just gave you a program with
the main exercises of the day. So, that
doesn't mean you don't do accessories. I
know some of you understand that and I'm
just giving you the main work. But,
let's talk a little bit about
accessories and rep ranges. I don't use
the same rep ranges on my accessories as
I do my main movements. So especially on
the intensification phases. So when I'm
doing sets of four or even sets of two,
I don't do sets of two on my accessories
as well. So my accessories for today are
going to be, you know, targeting the
muscles and the joint angles that I
didn't hit in the main movement. So all
I've done is bench press. My accessories
for my upper body day would include
things like dumbbell pressing. Depending
on the phase, I'd do different angles.
Today I'm doing shoulder press. Maybe
some arm work. Definitely some back
work. So I like to alternate or superset
between my push and my pull. and I don't
do the same rep range. So now I'm going
to be doing shoulder press. Um, you
know, I like to do my shoulder press
even though, you know, it's a pretty low
rep strength day, I'll still do higher
reps because that's um, you know, more
suitable for the exercise, right? So two
reps, imagine doing two reps on
dumbbells or two reps on lat pull downs
or two reps on bicep curls and tricep
extensions. Damn, I would be wrecked. So
when people say things like, you know,
low, you should do low reps because when
you do high rep sets, the first reps of
the session or the first reps of the
set, uh, all they're doing is
accumulating fatigue, but not really
contributing to muscle building. It's
like, well, the whole idea of that is
when you go too heavy, like two reps,
imagine if every week I came in and did,
you know, two rep maxes for my bicep
curls. I would have torn my biceps off a
long time ago or two rep maxes on my my
leg extensions, two rep maxes on my
hamstring curls. I would have ripped
those muscles off the bones a long long
time ago. It's just not practical,
right? So, this is where, you know, when
we consider rep ranges, I like to, you
know, the rep ranges that I give when I
say we're working on tens today or fives
today or twos today or whatever it is,
I'm only talking about the main
movements of the day. And then the
accessories, it's they they go by
different rules. So, today, you know,
what I like to consider with my exercise
variation is this. For my main work for
the day, I did a few sets of bench
press. that strengthens my pecs, my
delts, my triceps, but also it
strengthens my horizontal push plane.
So, my accessory exercises, I I don't
really want to do the same muscles but
with dumbbells. So, if I did flat
dumbbell press um with dumbbells, it's
kind of like slightly different but not
that different. Right? So, that's called
exercise redundancy, right? So, I'm now
fatigued my horizontal push plane. Don't
do more horizontal push plane in a
fatigue state. Do a different joint
angle. So that's why I'm doing a seated
dumbbell shoulder press, but it's not as
if like I could do incline press as
well, something like that. So this is
what we do for the accessories is we
factor in what did we neglect in the
main movement. So what joint angle or
range of motion did we neglect in the
main movement? Factor that in for the
accessories, right? So also consider the
nature of the exercise. What rep range
gives you the right stimulus? There's no
rule for this. You know, people say
things like, you know, whatever, I
respond better to high reps. I respond
better to low reps. That's what you need
to consider, you know, for low rep calf
raises. Try it yourself. So, I've done
it for a joke before. I did heavy sets
of five on a calf raise. I walk out of
the session and my calves feel like
they're barely even being stimulated. It
just feels like a little bit of ankle
discomfort. Um, and that's about all.
But I don't get that nice feeling of
muscle stimulation when I walk out of
the session. And that's how it should
feel once you've completed a set. Like
when I do a heavy bench press like that,
to be honest with you, my delts and pecs
feel pretty jacked. Like they feel like
I've done great work. But when I do
other exercises with low reps, it
doesn't feel the same. So that's why
you've got to pair the appropriate rep
range with the specific exercise. So I'm
doing uh shoulder press. Um I'll
probably do, I don't know, sets of 10.
And I'm going to be doing some lat pull
downs as well. Do you want to see me do
lat pull downs? So I don't know if
you've seen this one, but I'm doing a
closer supernated grip for my pull
downs. I quite like the feeling of this.
So using a supernated grip, my lats
attach to the front of my armbbone here.
So when I supernate my hand, that's
external rotation. It increases the
tension on that muscle. So a lot of our
favorite bodybuilders like to do their
pull downs with a supernated grip to
increase tension on the lats. To be
honest, I like pronated, I like neutral,
I like all of them. But just saying that
the supernated grip, that's one of the
benefits of it is it increases the
tension on the lat, which is the target
muscle of this exercise.
All M
Dorian Yates. I love Dorian Yates. One
of the best bodybuilders of all times,
but you know, he's not a scientist. He's
a practitioner, right? So, I don't
discount what practitioners say just
because they don't have a science
degree, right? And what he says about
lap pull downs is this is the only way
you should do it. So, I also don't agree
with that. I don't agree it's the only
way. I think it's a great way, but I
love someone who speaks in absolutes.
Even though it's not correct, it's very
convincing, but it's also true. He talks
about this is the only way you should do
it. That's not true that it's the only
way, but it's a very good way.
Supernated grip lat pull down. According
to him, that's the only way that he does
it. Worked for him. And he's got a very
big back, very big lats, which goes to
show you don't need a huge amount of
variation, right? You don't need So
every week I use the same lat pull down
except I might change from month to
month. I'll just change the handles. So
that's my variation because I do believe
that some variation is important and
beneficial, especially when we're
talking about improving our joint
health. So strengthening our elbow joint
in a supernated, neutral, and pronated
position has a lot of benefits, but
that's as far as my variations go. I
don't, you know, completely change the
machines. I do lat pull downs every
single week. I've been doing lat pull
downs 52 weeks a year pretty much, but I
just those are the small variations that
I make. Uh anyway, this is me blabbering
on now. Um but I think you get the point
of all of this. Um I'm going to do set
of I'm just going to keep on doing my
accessories. A couple of sets of
dumbbell shoulder press. I might do some
arm work and I'll be doing alternating
between my back work as well and maybe
so the arm work will be similar process
where I do tricep extensions with bicep
curls and that's my standard session. So
you can fill in the blanks with your
programs, but you've got the main
structure. And that's one of my favorite
ways of programming for a 20week time
period to go from, you know, 20 weeks
out of a competition, high reps, low
reps, high reps, low reps, peak compete.
You got a 20we process that I sell for a
lot of money. So go and do that. Go and
get strong. What team are you on? Are
you team high volume or team low volume?
Or are you like me where there's no such
thing as a freaking team and I'm on team
[__] do it all at different phases of
your long-term plan? That's the smart
team.
>> Well, I'll go up in 10 kilo jumps. I
just did 30 kilos for a feel set. I'll
see what 40 kilos feels like on the
shoulders and then probably do 50 kg
next.
Is there anything you want to add?
>> Um, I don't think so. I don't think so.
I'll keep on talking, but it gets boring
at some point. I think uh that was a
really good session. I mean session for
you guys who's listening and want to
learn about how to create a kickass
strength program that sees you building
muscle, building strength all year
round.
Click like, subscribe,
and join my online coaching.